# Predicting the need for home care services using healthcare spending among older, spousal bereaved adults 

Predicting the need for home care services using healthcare spending among older, spousal bereaved adults 

This project is my master thesis in Public Health Science from the Univerisity of Copenhagen

Background & objective: The increasing number of older individuals is placing strain on both the social and healthcare sector, making it imperative to explore ways to alleviate the challenges posed by the aging population. Since 2019, Danish municipalities have been obligated to identify individuals at high need of home care, yet currently, there is no recognized method for efficiently identifying high-risk individuals. Moreover, the loss of a spouse is considered to be a major life event that imposes considerable stress on the bereaved. Thus, spousal bereavement may initiate a sequence of events that leads to a decrease in the individual's resilience and thereby increases the individual's need for home care. This study seeks to investigate the resilience in older married adults who suffer the adversity of spousal bereavement and the need for home care. The study will use nationwide registry data from Statistics Denmark (https://www.dst.dk/en/) and analyze cohorts of individuals aged 65 years and older. The information leveraged will include their age, sex, other sociodemographic characteristics, and weekly average healthcare expenditures. The specific objectives of this thesis are: (i) To investigate the association between spousal bereavement and the need for home care during a one-year follow-up period among older adults, using a counterfactual, causal framework (ii). To predict the risk for need of home care among older adults during a one-year follow- up period, using spousal bereavement as the time origin for prediction modeling. Eventually, to assess the added value of health care expenditures as predictors variables for the need of home care risks in older adults.

The first objective (i) will give an insight into whether there is an association between spousal bereavement and the usage of home care on average. This functions as an identification strategy to determine if the effect of spousal bereavement constitutes a public health risk factor in terms of need for home care. Building upon this, the second objective (ii) will implement a personalized strategy utilising prognostic modelling to predict individualised need of home care risks.

The code for the project is diveded into three files avaliable here on github: 

Data availability: The data for the analysis is individual level data from Statistics Denmark. The data can only be shared under specific conditions. According to Danish law, scientific organizations can be authorized to work with data within Statistics Denmark and can provide access to individual scientists inside and outside of Denmark. Data are available via the Research Service Department at Statistics Denmark: www.dst.dk/da/TilSalg/Forskningsservice for researchers who meet the criteria for access to confidential data.
